*-damentals, that is.* ðŸ˜

In this chapter, we discuss the essential background knowledge to get us started on our journey to learn programming with Java. 

We will cover:

- The components of computer systems
- Programming languages
- Programming environments
- Why study Java 

But first, what are computers good for, anyway? 

## What is the purpose of a computer? 

For a large part of my life I believed that computers were only good for scrolling social media. Computers were simply like a television to me: every website or app was a channel to flip through. I would occasionally text a friend through instant messenger, but I viewed computers primarily as a passive form of entertainment. 

Sure, computers were useful on occasions when I had to type a paper for school. I could also use them to illegally download music and play games. That was cool. But eventually I had to ask myself: Why would serious adults use computers? What were they doing with them? Who were they emailing? 

As I entered high school, I noticed some older students using computers in the media lab to draw pictures and edit photos. They were deftly switching between brushes and filters; transforming bland photos into fantastic scenes with ease.  

In the band room, I saw musical keyboards hooked up to computers. A student played a few chords and the notes appeared on a digital music sheet in front of him. Then, he pressed the space bar on the computer keyboard and played back the music over the speakers. 

In the journalism lab, students were writing and arranging articles on a screen that was laid out like a real newspaper. One student plugged a digital camera into the computer and dragged a photo from a Lacrosse game right into the center of the page. I was astounded. The software wasn't just a tool for writing; it was a powerful medium for sophisticated design and communication.

Of course, scattered throughout the campus were less-specialized computers where students entered data into Excel or perfected a PowerPoint.  

Later, in college, I saw more rooms filled with even more specialized computers. Architecture students created 3D objects and building plans. Natural sciences students designed experiments using lab simulation software. Other students modelled complex calculations using black and white terminal screens; analyzing the composition of a far-away galaxy. 

At some point during this process, I became interested in how all of these programs were created. I learned that programmers use their own specialized programs to write programs for other people.

> **The purpose of a computer is to help a person achieve whatever goal they want to achieve**. It doesn't matter if the goal is to cure cancer or watch eight hours of short-form videos, a computer **will** be there to help you achieve it!  

However, because computers do whatever we ask, there is a risk that we become pacified by them. While learning to program is not a magic elixir to ward off the zombification process of mindless scrolling, it does unlock new ways of thinking about your computer. You come to view your computer as a powerful tool to help you build things. 

The goal of this book is to help you understand and access the world inside your computer. While this is only the start of your programming journey, I hope you can leave this book with the foundational knowledge, tools, and confidence to use your computer to build whatever you can dream up. 